Merge string-interpolation docs into scala3 book (#2839)
scala/docs.scala-lang: _overviews/scala3-book/string-interpolation.md

---
title: String Interpolation
type: chapter
description: This page provides more information about creating strings and using string interpolation.
languages: [es, ja, zh-cn]
num: 18
previous-page: first-look-at-types
next-page: control-structures
redirect_from:
  - /overviews/core/string-interpolation.html
---

## Introduction

String interpolation provides a very readable way to use variables inside strings.
For instance:

{% tabs example-1 %}
{% tab 'Scala 2 and 3' for=example-1 %}
```scala
val name = "James"
val age = 30 
println(s"$name is $age years old")   // "James is 30 years old"
```
{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

Using string interpolation is as simple as putting an `s` in front of your string
quotes, and prefixing any variable names with a `$` symbol.

### Other interpolators

The `s` that you place before the string is just one possible interpolator that Scala
provides.

Scala provides three string interpolation methods out of the box:  `s`, `f` and `raw`.
Further, a string interpolator is a just special method so it is possible to define your

> own. For instance, some database libraries define the very powerful `sql` interpolator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
own. For instance, some database libraries define a `sql` interpolator
```

definition a formatter of `%s` (`String`) is assumed.

Finally, as in Java, use `%%` to get a literal `%` character in the output string:

{% tabs literal-percent %}
{% tab 'Scala 2 and 3' for=literal-percent %}
```scala
println(f"3/19 is less than 20%%")  // "3/19 is less than 20%"
```
{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

### The `raw` Interpolator

The raw interpolator is similar to the `s` interpolator except that it performs no escaping of literals within the string.  Here's an example processed string:

{% tabs example-9 %}
{% tab 'Scala 2 and 3' for=example-9 %}
```scala
scala> s"a\nb"
res0: String =
a
b
```
{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

Here the `s` string interpolator replaced the characters `\n` with a return character. The `raw` interpolator will not do that.

{% tabs example-10 %}
{% tab 'Scala 2 and 3' for=example-10 %}
```scala
scala> raw"a\nb"
res1: String = a\nb
```
{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

The raw interpolator is useful when you want to avoid having expressions like `\n` turn into a return character.

In addition to the three default string interpolators, users can define their own.

## Advanced Usage

> The literal `s"Hi $name"` is parsed by scala as a _processed_ string literal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The literal `s"Hi $name"` is parsed by Scala as a _processed_ string literal.
```

This means that the compiler does some additional work to this literal. The specifics
of processed strings and string interpolation are described in [SIP-11][sip-11], but 
here's a quick example to help illustrate how they work.

### Custom Interpolators

In Scala, all processed string literals are simple code transformations. Anytime the compiler encounters a processed string literal of the form:

{% tabs example-11 %}
{% tab 'Scala 2 and 3' for=example-11 %}
```scala
id"string content"
```
{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

it transforms it into a method call (`id`) on an instance of [StringContext](https://www.scala-lang.org/api/current/scala/StringContext.html).
This method can also be available on implicit scope.
To define our own string interpolation, we need to create an implicit class (Scala 2) or an `extension` method (Scala 3) that adds a new method to `StringContext`.

As a trivial example, let's assume we have a simple `Point` class and want to create a custom interpolator that turns `p"a,b"` into a `Point` object.

{% tabs custom-interpolator-1 %}
{% tab 'Scala 2 and 3' for=custom-interpolator-1 %}
```scala

> case class Point(x:Double, y:Double)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
case class Point(x: Double, y: Double)
```

val pt = p"1,-2"     // Point(1.0,-2.0)
```
{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

We'd create a custom `p`-interpolator by first implementing a `StringContext` extension
with something like:

{% tabs custom-interpolator-2 class=tabs-scala-version %}

{% tab 'Scala 2' for=custom-interpolator-2 %}
```scala
implicit class PointHelper(val sc: StringContext) extends AnyVal {
  def p(args: Any*): Point = ???
}
```

**Note:** It's important to extend `AnyVal` in Scala 2.x to prevent runtime instantiation on each interpolation. See the [value class]({% link _overviews/core/value-classes.md %}) documentation for more.

{% endtab %}

{% tab 'Scala 3' for=custom-interpolator-2 %}
```scala
extension (sc: StringContext)
  def p(args: Any*): Point = ???
```
{% endtab %}

{% endtabs %}

Once this extension is in scope and the Scala compiler encounters `p"some string"`, it

> will process `some $string` to turn it into String tokens and expression arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will process `some string` to turn it into String tokens and expression arguments.
```

> For example, `p"1, $var"` would turn into:

Reviewer: `var` cannot be an identifier.

```suggestion
For example, `p"1, $variable"` would turn into:
```

Author: doh! wasn't thinking

{% tabs extension-desugaring class=tabs-scala-version %}

{% tab 'Scala 2' for=extension-desugaring %}
```scala

> new StringContext("1, ", "").p(var)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
new StringContext("1, ", "").p(variable)
```

```

The implicit class is then used to rewrite it to the following:

```scala

> new PointHelper(new StringContext("1, ", "")).p(var)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
new PointHelper(new StringContext("1, ", "")).p(variable)
```
